RFC: ID_Compat_Math characters allowed in identifiers (#3840)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-compat-math-identifiers.md

Note that you cannot start an identifier with a subscript or superscript, for example `₁a` will give a compiler error.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The Unicode sets [`ID_Compat_Math_Start`](https://util.unicode.org/UnicodeJsps/list-unicodeset.jsp?a=%5B%3AID_Compat_Math_Start%3DYes%3A%5D&g=&i=idtype) and [`ID_Compat_Math_Continue`](https://util.unicode.org/UnicodeJsps/list-unicodeset.jsp?a=%5B%3AID_Compat_Math_Continue%3DYes%3A%5D&g=&i=idtype) consist of the following characters:

1) `∂∇`
2) `∞`
3) `₀₁₂₃₄₅₆₇₈₉₊₋₌₍₎`
4) `⁰¹²³⁴⁵⁶⁷⁸⁹⁺⁻⁼⁽⁾`
5) `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` (italic and bold versions of `∂∇`)

The characters 1) - 4) are added to the set of Rust identifiers.

The characters 5) are added to the set of Rust identifiers, but will trigger an NFKC warning when used:
```
warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character: '𝛁'
```
similarly to how characters like `𝑥` (instead of `x`) or `𝑓` (instead of `f`) are triggering this warning today.

Note that if breaking precedence is desired I would suggest to not add the characters from 5).

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> * Characters like `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` are easily confusable with their base versions `∂∇` and can lead to subtle bugs. However the precedence in Rust seems to be to add them alongside their base version but trigger the NCKC warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Characters like `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` are easily confusable with their base versions `∂∇` and can lead to subtle bugs. However the precedence in Rust seems to be to add them alongside their base version but trigger the NFKC warning.
```

* Some people might find it difficult to read superscript and subscript letters on lower resolution screens or when using small font sizes.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

If this RFC is not implemented then everyone has to keep using ASCII characters like `gradient_energy` or `a01`.

The impact of not implementing it should be fairly small, but implementing it could invite more scientific oriented people to the Rust language and make it easier for them to implement complex concepts.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Rust has the philosophy to be open to various cultures and languages and allow them use their native symbols as identifiers.
Example which compiles in stable Rust without warning:
```
fn main() {
    let λ = 2.718_f32; // Greek letter lambda

>     let 파이 = 3.141_f32; // Greek letter pi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let 파이 = 3.141_f32; // Korean word for the Greek letter pi
```

}

```

A vast set of characters added as part of Unicode character sets are easily confusable with other characters.
Example which compiles in stable Rust and triggers a "warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character":
```
fn main() {
    let l = 1.0;
    let ℓ = l + 2.0;
    let 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐 = |𝑥: f32| 𝑥 * ℓ + l;
    let Σ = (1..5).map(|𝑖| 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐(𝑖 as f32)).sum::<f32>();
    println!("∑: {Σ}");
}
```

There are characters which one might argue should never have been added but are part of allowed Unicode sets.
Example which compiles in stable Rust and triggers a "warning: identifier contains an uncommon character":
```
fn ᅟ() {  // U+115F (Hangul Choseong Filler) renders as blank
    println!("boo");
}

fn main() {
    ᅟ();  // dito
}
```

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Are there other character sets which could be added as part of this RFC?
- Should the italic and bold versions of characters `∂∇` be added?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Rust has chosen the path of allowing non-ASCII characters as identifiers and this RFC adds some more characters which are useful to the scientific domain.

> There might be other usefule sets of characters which could be added in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There might be other useful sets of characters which could be added in the future.
```

Similarly `let a = [2, 0]; let b = a₁;` will naturally give a compiler error that `a₁` is an unknown identifier and not be interpreted as `let b = a[0];`.

The characters 5) are added to the set of Rust identifiers, but will trigger an NFKC warning when used:
```
warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character: '𝛁'
```
similarly to how characters like `𝑥` (instead of `x`) or `𝑓` (instead of `f`) are triggering this warning in stable Rust today.
This follows the guidelines from the [Unicode Technical Standard #55 - Source Code Handling (UTS55)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) which recommends that "implementations should provide a mechanism to warn about identifiers that are not in the General Security Profile for Identifiers" as defined in the [Unicode Technical Standard #39 - Unicode Security Mechanisms (UTS39)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#General_Security_Profile).
In particular the characters in 5) are identified as "Not_NFKC", i.e. characters that cannot occur in strings normalized to [NFKC](https://unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms).

> It shall be pointed out that Unicode specifically [mentions Rust as a positive industry example](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) following the recommendations from the General Security Profile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Unicode specifically [mentions Rust as a positive industry example](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) that follows the recommendations from the General Security Profile.
```

5) `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃`  (italic and bold versions of `∂` and `∇`) from various sets like [Bold Greek symbols](https://util.unicode.org/UnicodeJsps/list-unicodeset.jsp?a=%5Cp%7BNames_List_Subheader=Bold%20Greek%20symbols%7D).

The characters 1) - 4) are added to the set of characters allowed in Rust identifiers.
[UAX31](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#Standard_Profiles) notes that "supporting these characters is recommended for some computer languages because they can be beneficial in some applications".
These characters will not have syntactic use and are only added to the set of characters allowed in identifiers following the recommendations of [UAX31-R3b](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#R3b).
For example `let a = 2.0; let b = a²;` will naturally give a compiler error that `a²` is an unknown identifier and not be interpreted as `let b = a * a;`.
Similarly `let a = [2, 0]; let b = a₁;` will naturally give a compiler error that `a₁` is an unknown identifier and not be interpreted as `let b = a[0];`.

The characters 5) are added to the set of Rust identifiers, but will trigger an NFKC warning when used:
```

> warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character: '𝛁'

Reviewer 2: Probably mention that this will be `uncommon_codepoints`.

If more characters are added to this set; while they may not always be non-NFKC, they will very likely still trigger `uncommon_codepoints`

Basically we should make it clear that using these characters will very likely trigger lints, even if more get added to the set.

```
similarly to how characters like `𝑥` (instead of `x`) or `𝑓` (instead of `f`) are triggering this warning in stable Rust today.
This follows the guidelines from the [Unicode Technical Standard #55 - Source Code Handling (UTS55)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) which recommends that "implementations should provide a mechanism to warn about identifiers that are not in the General Security Profile for Identifiers" as defined in the [Unicode Technical Standard #39 - Unicode Security Mechanisms (UTS39)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#General_Security_Profile).
In particular the characters in 5) are identified as "Not_NFKC", i.e. characters that cannot occur in strings normalized to [NFKC](https://unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms).

Note that Unicode specifically [mentions Rust as a positive industry example](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) that follows the recommendations from the General Security Profile.

> # Drawbacks

Reviewer 2: We should probably prominently mention somewhere that  _all_ of these characters [are `id_status=restricted`](https://util.unicode.org/UnicodeJsps/list-unicodeset.jsp?a=%5B%3AID_Compat_Math_Continue%3DYes%3A%5D&g=&i=idstatus), which means `uncommon_codepoints` will still lint about them (for NFKC reasons).

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> * Characters like `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` are easily confusable with their base versions `∂∇` and can lead to subtle bugs. However the precedence in Rust seems to be to add them alongside their base version but trigger the NFKC warning.

Reviewer 2: ... also the confusables warning if they get mixed. We have redundant protections here.

* The superscript characters could be confused with actual mathematical operations. For example someone might write `let a = 2.0; let b = 3.0 * a²;` and be confused that this will result in a compiler error. There might also be the potential for subtle bugs like `let a² = 2; let a = 2; let x = a²;` and erronously assuming that `x = 4`, however one can argue that this is not due to the superscript characters as it can happen as well when only using ASCII characters: `let a_sq = 2; let a = 2; let x = a_sq;`.

* The subscript characters could be confused with indexing operation. For example someone might write  `let a = [2, 0]; let b = a₁;` and be confused that this will result in a compiler error.

* Some people might find it difficult to read superscript and subscript letters on lower resolution screens or when using small font sizes.

* Rust might want to decide in the future to give certain superscripts and subscripts syntactic meaning. For example they might want to interpret `a²` as `a * a` or `a₁` as `a[0]`. The latter sounds espcially unlikely though due to the general disagreement of 0-based vs 1-based indexing.

> # Rationale and alternatives

Reviewer 3: Rust currently just follows Unicode's recommendation on what should be allowed as a programming language identifier: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2457-non-ascii-idents.html (Annex 31).

This seems like a reasonable choice, letting the Unicode Consortium handle Unicode decisions, so while I can certainly see the motivation you presented, I am cautious about this change.

It would be very good to have a description here of why Annex 31 does not contain these symbols, if such discussion can be found anywhere, to ensure that we are not missing something important.

Reviewer 2: > It would be very good to have a description here of why Annex 31 does not contain these symbols

UAX 31 _does_ contain these symbols, that's what this profile comes from: https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#Mathematical_Compatibility_Notation_Profile

For the question "why are they not in the default profile", the answer is basically to leave room for languages that want to do custom operators, or use these as builtin operators.

It's also just caution in expanding the set to include new meanings: while the XID set expands with each Unicode release as new characters get added, it would not be good for new _types_ of characters to get included: if a programming language cared only about linguistic content in identifiers; it would perhaps be surprised if mathematical subscripts entered the fray. This separate profile allows for explicit choice.

> This seems like a reasonable choice, letting the Unicode Consortium handle Unicode decisions, so while I can certainly see the motivation you presented, I am cautious about this change.

The mathematical profile is included in UAX 31, the identifiers standard: that is the Unicode consortium making a Unicode decision that these are acceptable in identifiers. It's a choice from a menu that programming languages may choose from. Rust is currently following Unicode's recommendation, but this RFC would have Rust continuing to follow Unicode's recommendation.

* Some people might find it difficult to read superscript and subscript letters on lower resolution screens or when using small font sizes.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

If this RFC is not implemented then everyone has to keep using ASCII characters for identifier in scientific code, for example `gradient_energy` or `a_12`.

The impact of not implementing it should be fairly small, but implementing it could invite more scientific oriented people to the Rust language and make it easier for them to implement complex concepts.

Alternatively Rust could decide to give the proposed characters syntatic meaning.

Superscript characters could be interpreted as potentiation, for example `let a = 2; let b = a²;` could be a synonym to `let a = 2; let b = a * a;`.
This would open up a host of questions and potential issues, like:
- Should `a²⁻³` be interpreted as `1/a`?
- There is no superscript character for multiplication `*`.

`∞` could be a synonym or replacement to `f32::INIFITY`, however there is no precedence for using non-ASCII characters in `core`/`std` and this would likely meet considerable opposition.

> Derivatives could be added as a language features via auto-differentiation techniques thus giving `∇` and `∂` syntactic meaning, however there is no precedence of this in other languages and similar features are usually provided by libraries.

Reviewer: there is [experimental support for automatic differentiation](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/124509) being worked on for rustc.
Mathematica supports the syntax $∂_{x}f$ for $\frac{∂f}{∂x}$ and the syntax $∇_{x}f$ for the gradient of $f$ with respect to $x$.

Alternatively Rust could decide to give the proposed characters syntatic meaning.

Superscript characters could be interpreted as exponentiation, for example `let a = 2; let b = a²;` could be a synonym to `let a = 2; let b = a * a;`.
This would open up a host of questions and potential issues, like:
- Should `a²⁻³` be interpreted as `1/a`?
- There is no superscript character for multiplication `*` or division `/`.

`∞` could be a synonym or replacement to `f32::INIFITY`, however there is no precedence for using non-ASCII characters in `core`/`std` and this would likely meet considerable opposition.

Derivatives could be added as a language feature using auto-differentiation techniques and `∇` and `∂` could be given syntactic meaning.
For example Mathematica supports the syntax `∂ₓf` for a partial derivative of `f` with respect to `x` and the syntax `∇ₓf` for the gradient with respect to `x`.

> Moreover there is [experimental support for automatic differentiation](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/124509) being worked on for rustc which uses an attribute `#[autodiff(df, ..)]` with a user-provided function name (`df` in this case) for the automatically generated derivative.

Reviewer 4: nit: We dropped `autodiff` a while ago and now offer `autodiff_forward` and `autodiff_reverse`.
